---
layout: post
title: In the beginning there were Dotfiles
date: 2020-04-26 09:30:40 -0400
category: 
tags:
---

# Introduction

Anytime that I am writing a new application or new code I am always tinkering to try and make things faster and easier. I usually am trying out new things and will frequently fail, causing some catostraphic failure. This will often lead me to reconstitute a machine or configuration back to a steady state, (what I call my normally operating workflow). Since I do this quite often, I always considered could I automate this and have a configuration for my development environment that I could easily run on new machines or ones I destroy. It is a novel concept but it is easier to conceive than to do, I normally have to install all of my most used software and configure it and that is normally hundreds of applicaitons and tools. Case in point I am currently using two main machines, and the footprint of these machines looks like the following:

<table class="inline">
<tr>
<td>I currently have 106 applications installed on my Mac OS X install</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>I currntly have 164 applicaitons installed on my ArchLinux install</td>
</tr>
</table>

So when I cause my own destruction it takes me a good bit of time and effort to get back up and running.

There are many isntances when I have not caused my  own demise, If you have ever started with a new company then most software engineers know that project startup and analyzing a code base takes a lot of mental engergy and cycles. While doing this at many different companies and on many different teams I realized that configuring new machines and environments is a slow and and difficult process. So how do you speed up that process for creating new development environments. One way has been utilizing Docker and Vagrant and otehr virtualization technologies, which expidite the delivery of development environments tremendously; however, those environments are bare bones and not customized to an individual software developer. So obviously this takes some time, to configure so that developers can be productive and work at their most efficient. 

Now if you are a programming in multiple languages, using multiple IDEs, and have various build environments like me you are constantly configuring and reconfiguring your machine to make sure things work. Even worse you could be swithcing machines depending on the project, service, or even feature which means you spend a little bit of upfront time making sure the machine is configured to your liking and is consistent. Normally I spend my time configuring a machine by installing packages and applications onto the machine and configuring things, digging through configuration files and making sure everything is correct on the mahcine, it is quite a chore. Thankfully in the files we are configuring we have found a way to shirk some resonsibility and automate the heck out of some of these configurations and installations.

# Enter Dotfiles
Within all operating systems there are ways to configure attributes and settings, to perform a set of consistent actions and persist them even beyond restart. In a Windows system those generally are performed with Registry Keys, a set of key value pairs where the key is an identifier relating to an applicaiton or system attribute. These are pretty complicated because they can be binary, hexadecimal, or text/string values, which makes configuraiton sometimes very complicated. However it is possible to configure these using automated mechanisms.

In Linux/Unix based systems there are a number of hidden files that work to configure various aspects of your operating system and applications. These hidden files start with a dot "." so they are called dotfiles. For a good portion of applications that are installed on a Linux/Unix system there will be an accompanying dot file. So for an application like Vi/Vim there will be a dot file that holds configuraiton settings for Vim. 

# Dotfiles are my Friends
When a lot of engineers think about dotfiles they mostly think about aliases and function shortcuts, maybe making a shortcut like <code> la='ls -A'</code>. Dotfiles are a lot more than just shortcuts they can contain the configuration for all of your tools, layouts, and workflow. In configuring tools, most applications that are installed have configurations that are stored in one or more '.' style configuration files. Vim for example has a file that has the base configuration for Vim (e.g. .vimrc file), this file has its own syntax and commands which allows for customization at a tool level. 

Dotfiles are normally stored your $HOME directory or any other hidden .folders that are configured for the tool or applicaiton that has been installed. An example folder structure for dotfiles could look like this:

<pre>
<code>
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary   80 Feb 17 21:00 .bash_profile
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 3.3K Feb 17 14:15 .bash_prompt
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 3.1K Mar 26 09:42 .bashrc
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 3.2K Feb 17 20:21 .colors
drwxr-xr-x 15 rzachary 4.0K Feb 27 12:35 .config
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 7.2K Feb 28 22:34 .dir_colors
-rwxr-xr-x  1 rzachary  881 Feb 25 15:48 .functions
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary   42 Feb 17 08:28 .gitattributes
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 4.9K Feb 17 20:21 .gitconfig
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary  493 Mar 26 09:41 .inputrc
drwxr-xr-x  4 rzachary 4.0K Feb 15 21:25 .local
drwxr-xr-x  2 rzachary 4.0K Feb 15 09:44 .lynx
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 2.1K Mar 16 22:39 .tmux.conf
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 2.3K Feb 18 16:38 .vimrc
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary   22 Feb 17 08:28 .wgetrc
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary  612 Mar 26 09:39 .xinitrc
drwxr-xr-x  6 rzachary 4.0K Mar 22 20:46 .xmonad
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 3.5K Mar 26 09:36 .Xresources
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary   83 Mar 16 22:37 .zprofile
-rw-r--r--  1 rzachary 4.3K Mar 26 09:50 .zshrc
</code>
</pre>

There are a lot of files in here and there could be even more but the important ones are the .bashrc, .bash_profile, and .bash_prompt files. These files will provide the base config for your bash shell and can be used to bootstrap a number of programs and tools that run at startup. The files mentioned will be loaded during certian times and certain conditions so it is important to understand the differences between interactive shells, non-login shells and the permuations of the types. 

### Shells

Interactive Login Shell - This is any shell that has interactions with a terminal or tty prompt, this can occur whenever you login or ssh into a remote machine.

Interactive Non-Login Shell - Same as above but doesn't require a login to create the instance. So when you open a new terminal window this creates a new instance of this type of shell.

Non-Interactive Login Shell - This almost never happens, and is rare but I thought it a benefit to cover this. NILS can be invoked manually by running a command like <code> echo 'some command' | ssh 'some server' </code>, since this will connect to a remote server via ssh without a commmand making it a login shell. However since <code> echo 'some command' </code> is acting as a script being run on the local machine and also acting as the stdin of the ssh session; the ssh session is now a NILS.  

Non-Interactive Non-Login Shell - This is a shell that is created when a script is ran on a local machine. All scripts run in their own subshell and this shell is not interactive. It only opens to execute the script and closes immediately once the script is finished. 

The reason why this is important to know these types of shells is that only certain types of configuration files are ran when certain shells are executed. Of the dot files that we use to bootstrap configs .bash_profile, .bashrc, and .bash_prompt these run during certain instance. The .bash_profile is read and executed when Bash is invoked as an interactive login shell, while .bashrc is executed for an interactive non-login shell.

# Examples
Sometimes seeing is believing so i have provided my current dotfiles as examples.

My Dotfiles can be found here:
[Arch-Linux]("https://github.com/rzachary/dotfiles-arch")
[MacOSX]("https://github.com/rzachary/dotfiles")
